Given that Agency already solves interrupt-resume and checkpointing at the language level, here's what I'd expect a mature version of
   the language/ecosystem to provide for multi-agent coordination:

  Language-Level Primitives

  1. Agent-to-agent communication channels

  Right now, Agency has fork for parallel isolated execution and nodes for state transitions within a single agent. What's missing is a way for agents
   to talk to each other. A language-level primitive like a typed channel or mailbox would be natural:

  // hypothetical
  channel orders: OrderRequest

  node router(msg: string) {
    send orders <- classify(msg)
  }

  node fulfillment() {
    const req = receive orders  // blocks until message arrives
    // ...
  }

  This would avoid the "everything through shared state" problem that makes LangGraph multi-agent so awkward. The language could enforce type safety
  on what flows between agents at compile time — something no existing framework can do.

  2. Handoff as a first-class construct

  Nodes already model permanent state transitions within an agent. The natural extension is handoff between agents — transferring not just control but
   also context (message history, relevant state). Something like:

  // hypothetical
  handoff to billing_agent with { history: messages, context: account }

  The language could enforce at compile time that the receiving agent's schema matches what you're handing off — catching the "malformed conversation
  history" bugs that plague LangGraph swarm handoffs.

  3. Supervision / orchestration keywords

  A supervise or delegate construct that expresses "ask this agent to do this, get back a result, decide what to do next" — without the developer
  manually wiring up a routing LLM call, parsing its output, and dispatching. The supervisor "translation layer" problem (from LangGraph benchmarks)
  is fundamentally a problem of the orchestrator re-summarizing sub-agent output. A language could let sub-agents respond directly to the user while
  the supervisor only handles routing.

  Standard Library / Ecosystem Patterns

  4. Pre-built orchestration strategies

  Agency already has a strategy module in its stdlib. This is the right place for:
  - Round-robin: Agents take turns on a shared task
  - Fan-out/fan-in: Dispatch to N specialists, aggregate results (an extension of fork but across agents rather than threads)
  - Escalation chains: Try agent A, if confidence is low, escalate to agent B
  - Voting/consensus: Multiple agents propose answers, a resolution strategy picks the winner

  These are the patterns teams build from scratch in every LangGraph project. A stdlib would save weeks.

  5. Agent discovery and registration

  For larger systems, you need agents to discover each other dynamically rather than hard-coding references. A registry pattern — either in the stdlib
   or as a language feature — where agents declare their capabilities and other agents can query for "who handles billing?" at runtime. This is what
  Google ADK's A2A protocol does at the protocol level. Agency could do it at the language level with stronger guarantees.

  6. Scoped state visibility

  The shared-state-vs-isolated-state problem in LangGraph is a design gap. Agency should have explicit scoping:
  - Private state: Only this agent can see it
  - Shared state: Explicitly declared, typed, and visible to named agents
  - Broadcast state: Available to all agents in the system

  The language compiler could enforce these boundaries, preventing the "message history leakage" problem that plagues LangGraph's swarm pattern.

  Runtime / Tooling

  7. Multi-agent debugger

  Agency already has a checkpoint debugger. The multi-agent extension would let you visualize the full system: which agent has control, what's in each
   agent's state, what messages have been exchanged, where handoffs happened. LangGraph Studio does a version of this but can't inspect subgraph state
   through indirection. A language-level approach could guarantee full visibility because the compiler knows the full topology.

  8. Recursion and cost guards

  Built-in limits on handoff depth, total LLM calls across agents, and token budgets — the things LangGraph forces you to manage manually with
  separate recursion limits per subgraph. The language runtime could enforce a global budget across the full agent tree.

  9. Testing primitives for multi-agent

  Agency already has testing support. For multi-agent, you'd want to mock individual agents, inject messages into channels, assert on handoff
  sequences, and test that the full system produces the right result when agents interact. Something like:

  // hypothetical
  test "billing handoff" {
    mock billing_agent returns { status: "resolved" }
    const result = run router("I need a refund")
    assert result.handoff_to == "billing_agent"
    assert result.status == "resolved"
  }

  What This Adds Up To

  The core bet of Agency Lang is that agent primitives belong in the language, not in library code. If that thesis is right, then multi-agent
  coordination is the most important place to apply it. The bugs we cataloged in LangGraph — parallel interrupt ID collisions, subgraph state amnesia,
   message history leakage, broken handoff message pairing — are all consequences of trying to express agent coordination in a general-purpose
  language that has no concept of agents.

  A purpose-built language could make many of these bugs structurally impossible through compile-time checks: typed channels prevent message schema
  mismatches, scoped state prevents leakage, language-level handoffs prevent broken tool message pairing, and exact-point resume (which Agency already
   has) eliminates the entire idempotency burden.

  That's the promise. The question is whether Agency invests in this direction or stays focused on single-agent ergonomics.
